I'm ananus I'm associate professor of
Social and cultural anthropology at the
University of
Helsinki and I'll be talking about power
and virtue who will yield in
Conflict I'm making a reference to David
graber's relatively recent work on
hierarchy and his ideas about the
development of uh anthropological
approaches to hierarchy and social
status and in line with today's focus on
diogenous I'll be connecting it to
Virtue so power as
virtuous and power as
coercive uh I'm a cognitive
Anthropologist so I'm interested in
human development and making a
connection between the evolved cognitive
capacities and psychological
dispositions for for example reasoning
recognizing status differences and
reasoning about social hierarchies and
how these uh develop uh in the life
course of an individual who grows up in
a particular cultural environment uh
today I'll be referring to some of my
comparative work in China and in the
UK uh focusing on
children so in my approach to status and
hierarchy I draw from Roy DeAndre uh
who's a cognitive Anthropologist his
approach of viewing power as power not
inherently good or bad so power can be
oppressive uh oppressive but for example
we also can be about protection or about
being a role model uh attention to the
procal or positive dimensions of power
have also recently resurfaced in
mainstream anthropology approaches to
good life and
Morality In This edited volume called
hierarchy and value edited by hickles
and Hayes uh contributors address the
question of how it is the hierarchies
come to be seen as legitimate from
different ethnographic perspectives and
David Graber uh wrote an afterward for
this
volume so connecting hierarchy to moral
models of good rather than presuming the
hierarchy is oppressive and therefore
bad is a refreshing contribution to
anthropological studies of power
taking this perspective enables an
investigation into the coercive and
non-coercive or even benevolent aspects
of power within the same
framework in his afterward today volume
uh David argued that the focus on
hierarchical systems in anthropology has
come at the expense of attention to
interpersonal status Dynamics and that's
what I'll be looking at
today uh David reviewed shift from the
analytical concepts of prestige
domination and rank to
hierarchy and made the point they
entailed a decrease in attention to
problematizing
relationships there has been uh I quote
a broad drift toward terms status
Authority and especially hierarchy that
imply those relationships are always
already legitimated or even that they do
not need to be legitimated since they
are fundamentally constitutive of social
reality itself end of
quote so through a developmental view of
status so looking at Child
Development uh I turned this attention
to the level of interpersonal
relationships starting with the premise
the hierarchy is not only about
inequality but it's also about virtue
learning admiration and willingness to
be a role model
so when you uh I collaborate a lot with
developmental psychologists and when you
look at the developmental psychology
work experimental work on children's
reasoning of hierarchy and Status
differences the uh findings are that
from very young age already from from
pre preal infancy children recognize
hierarchy status differences and they
expect
higher status individuals to win zero
some conflict situations so these zero
some conflict situations of for example
who is going to yield uh when uh walk
when two individuals encounter each
other in a walkway who is going to yield
in that situation or when there's one
exciting resource like a toy or candy
who is going to get that uh that's used
used often as a measure as a in these
experimental
designs so on the basis of my field work
ethnographic field work in China with
children uh I expected that if the same
developmental experimental work was
carried out in China it might yield
different results so before going into
these
results uh let's look at the
framework of power that I'm
using so this comes from the uh work of
Joe Henrik and Gil white evolutionary
anthropologists who have distinguished
between dominance as and Prestige as two
distinct processes for higher status so
it does not mean that individuals can
for example only be dominant or
prestigious so these are not
characteristics necessarily of
individuals these are two distinct
processes that uh can be uh can be used
to gain higher status
in human Societies or communities so
when you compare these two to each other
uh so dominance has deeper philogenetic
Roots so it can be really found across
species not only in primates or humans
but uh Birds fish and so on whereas
Prestige is potentially unique to humans
there is some recent limited evidence of
prestige processes also in other
primates
but it seems to be something that is
quite
distinct uh to humans because it relates
to our capacity and motivation for
cultural learning
so uh dominance is based on coercion
often physical size and force whereas
Prestige is based on skill in that
particular environment on things that
matter in that particular environment
success and importantly willingness to
teach so that means that prestigious
individuals are often not for example
erratic or aggressive but they are
relatively
amicable and willing role models and
when you look at the uh what the
behavior and emotions that these
processes elicit in the
subordinates dominance elicit submission
fear and avoidance where Prestige elicit
attention copying learning imitation
difference
so this is that these are two distinct
bases for social status it doesn't mean
that they cover all possible uh all
possible
relational sources of high status but
they are argued to cover two uh distinct
ones that are universally available to
All
Humans
so then let's go on to this Chinese
value of yielding that made me think
that if we run this developmental study
in China uh we might get different
results from uh about this on this
measure of who yields in a conflict so
on the basis of my ethnographic findings
uh I distinguished between two types of
yielding respectful yielding and modest
yielding and
yielding uh rang in Chinese it's
generally it's a it's a moral value and
also a virtue and a social skill and uh
there are two types of yielding
respectful yielding which means a lower
status individual yielding to a higher
status individual and this is very much
this is very Salient um in the in the
moral system available to children in
China from very early childhood for
example it's in line with this idea of
respecting the elders or FAL
piety so whereas modest yielding which
means higher status individual yielding
to a lower status individual is is
perhaps more
sophisticated and uh it's learned later
in life later in childhood and uh
becomes more sophisticated in in the
life during the life course and uh
modest yielding is it's a it's a sign of
a person's High status and it's also a
way of gaining status or even competing
uh for it and what it basically means is
that uh in matters that are relatively
unimportant so not completely
unimportant but uh but also not uh not
extremely important a person of high
status will forfeit their personal
interest
or withhold their view or take the blame
for example and in this way they
preemptively manage conflicts uh prevent
them from happening and also uh manage
conflicts as they are
happening there's this classic moral
story uh still very popular today called
Kong wrong uh yields Pairs and uh it
tells the story of KR
uh who has several older brothers and
young one younger brother he's given a
task of Distributing uh pairs among his
brothers and he gives the biggest to the
oldest but then he also gives a bigger
one to this youngest brother and keeps
the smallest to himself cong's father
asks why did you H why did you yield to
the why did you give the biggest pairs
to the big brothers and congan says
because they are older than me I should
yield to them and then father asks well
you are older than the little brother
why did you give him the big bigger pair
as well and uh Kong responds because
he's younger I should I should yield to
yield to him so a big brother yields to
Young uh little
brother and so both respectful yielding
and modest yielding are taught through
this moral
story when I in my conversations with
the
children uh the younger age group so say
four to 5 year olds generally where
could recognize this idea of respectful
yielding so uh for example respecting
the elders but they were not familiar
with this idea of modest yielding so
higher status yielding to a lower status
but older children so starting from 8
years old uh who are participating in my
research could give examples of both of
these types of yielding and here's a
typical example of my conversation I'm
talking to twin boys uh 9-year-old twin
boys G and Diddy and G big brother is 10
minutes older than didy the younger
brother and he's higher even though the
age difference is so small G big brother
is higher in status than D little
brother do you know this word t so that
means I'm using the more formal concept
modestly yield in Chinese I do what does
it mean Chang means for example when you
are sitting on a bus and there's an old
person or little child or pregnant woman
they are not convenient standing there
then you can yield your seed to them let
them sit then they will be very happy
and very grateful to you so this is an
example of respect for
yielding I understand G do you have an
explanation no I don't have anything
else okay now you're little brother and
you big brother who has the yield a bit
more go is me big
brother why because many people say big
brother must yield to little
brother ah it's like that do you agree
Diddy you agree so little brother
doesn't have to yield to Big Brother
sometimes sometimes I will yield for
example when we go to the toilet right
if he really has to go I might let him
go first oh I understand in what kind of
situations big brother must yeld to
little brother for example when writing
homework if I've done more than him I
will yield to wait for him for 10
minutes minutes so our parents won't
criticize him so with some first they
give an example of respectful yielding
while with some prompting they are also
giving examples of modest
yielding so yielding uh is a is a social
skill and it's a virtue and with age uh
parents start to parents start to teach
this skill and value already at very
young very young age for example by
urging children who are arguing over a
toy
uh urging the older child to yield to
the little one just yield just yield to
the little one uh and with age some of
the children will become increasingly
sophisticated and skilled uh in this
virtue of yielding uh modest
yielding
so with these findings uh after the uh
having these ethnographic findings I
went into my field workk in London uh in
a school which was I was based in a
school there too uh with particular
interest in how children uh resolve
conflicts and what are the status
related Dynamics in relation to them and
first of all I found that generally
there was this overall difference that
children in London um they were much
more tolerant of dominant Behavior than
the children in China so in naning where
I carried my research in these schools
there was more or less a unanimous
dislike of dominant Behavior whereas uh
in in the schools in London where I did
research it could be tolerated to some
degree then uh when thinking about how
adults the kind of moral education from
adults to Children uh really what
emerged as the uh most commonly
mobilized more Val was respect and it
was U it was used to address any
behavioral issues and also just as a
kind of Channel how to be a good person
um kind of a umbrella value and uh it
was used to for example discipline by
saying in a noisy classroom that other
people are giving you respect uh I am
giving you respect by listening to you
other people are not giving you respect
or the children were for example uh
instructed to how to resolve conflicts
uh in a respectful way and always act
respectfully towards each other and to
this end
uh on top of the whiteboards in the
classrooms there were these polite
phrases respectful
phrases uh that could be used to resolve
uh to carry out respectful conversations
and resolve conflicts so for example I
agree with you to an extent but you make
a good point but uh let me check if uh I
got this right so at first clance uh
they don't seem too different from the
Chinese value of yielding uh but
actually there's there's a fundamental
difference here uh so when look uh when
examined in combination with some of
these other values that were promoted by
the schools in London of equality uh
individual voice and so on uh it
actually respect means that uh respect
mostly refers to uh controlling your
emotional impulses so in a conflict
situation you are uh able to
respectfully argue your point and defend
your view so that it what results and to
contain the kind of emotional conflict
so that the most deserving view emerges
as the as the winner and you are also
expected to defend your interest and
Views where the Chinese value of modest
yielding actually involves forfeiting
your interest or
uh even a concrete resource even if you
even if your view your interest was the
most
deserving uh also there's another
difference uh and that is that respect
was part of this universalistic moral
code that maintains that a person must
behave morally that is respectfully
toward all others regardless of their
status this moral universalism is
grounded in the Universal quality of the
unique and sacred personhood shared by
the actor and the
recipient however the way this concept
of respect was uh was taught combined
this universalism with very
particularistic elements so everyone
should be respected but the degree of
respect is also mediated by the
individual characteristics of the
recipient which make them deserving of
it so for example a person who is of LW
status should be treated with respect
because first they are a person just
like you and second they might have
hidden qualities that render the degree
of respect they deserve even higher than
you
know so for example the children work
taught these exemplary stories of for
example the heroic black US Marine who
could not get an airport taxi when
returning from
War and the value of respect in this way
differs from the Chinese value of modest
yielding uh because in the Chinese value
of modest yielding it rest rests
specifically on the non-deserving
quality of its recipient so it's a
virtue that is cultivated in the actor
so the person uh who is yielding
modestly and is made a virtue by the
fact that the
recipient uh does not deserve
it
so on the basis of these ethnographic
findings I collaborated with the
developmental psychologists narus AFI
and Felix vagan to develop an experiment
experiment uh to see if our if our
predictions would be born
out we tested two age
groups in ch in naning and in
London and our predictions were that
children in London would infer that the
higher status person wins against a law
status person regardless of whether the
status is rooted in dominance or
Prestige whereas children in naning uh
would infer the dominant person to be WN
to be the winner against the subordinate
but in the scene between a prestigious
and subordinate character they could
infer either the prestigious person to
modestly yield or the subordinate person
to respectfully yield so there might not
be clear in in either direction and now
I'll show you the stimuli that we used
so we had some cues for uh
establishing a status relationship
between the two characters in the scene
and uh and establishing that the higher
status character is either prestigious
or
dominant this is dio let's see what
happens what are you doing I'm going to
color my picture I can color it in blue
or I can color it in
purple I like purple you should color it
in
purple but I want to color it in blue no
color it in
purple okay I'll color it in
purple so this was the dominant
scene let's see what happens
next I'm going to pick an animal to put
on my picture I can pick the zebra or I
can pick the penguin what do you think I
should do I like the penguin I put the
Penguin on my
picture can I see your picture yes
here's my
picture then I'll pick the penguin
too and this was the prestige
scene and then our test questions
one of them is older than the other
which one is
older one of them is older than the
other which one is
older D wants to sit down where is d
going to sit next to this one or next to
this
one who does d like more this one or
this one who is D more scared of this
one or this one so these were the test
questions to see if the children
distinguish between Prestige and
dominance and here are the results so
the developmental comparison so the
difference between the two age groups of
children there was a significant
difference the younger children do
recognize that the prestigious and
dominant individuals are higher in
status but they do not recognize that
the prestigious person is more liked and
less feared what this means is they
recognize that prestigious and dominant
individuals are high status but they
don't distinguish between these two
bases of high status so Prestige and
dominance whereas all the children they
recognize all of these aspects and
there's no difference between China and
the UK in this comparison so this gave
us a baseline uh on which we could
develop the yielding experience
experiments let's see what
happens
wow what do you think will happen next
is this going to happen or is this going
to
happen and then we show the same for the
uh for the other character the
prestigious and here are the
results between the age groups the
developmental comparison there was again
a different significant difference so
younger children were random in their
choices whereas older children choose
the highest status character as the
winner so then we look at uh so that
means that increasingly children start
to reason against uh on the basis of
social status difference in in terms of
who is going to win a zero some conflict
so then when we compare China and the UK
there was again a significant difference
in the older age group where we would
expected to be so in the children in the
UK they choose higher status character
as the winner regardless of whether it's
dominant or prestigious the character
whereas children in China were equally
likely to choose the lower or the
highest status character as the winner
so again as we
predicted and 33% of the all the Chinese
children they specifically mentioned
yielding and those who chose uh who
chose that the prestigious character is
not going to win the ice cream uh
directly said that the prestigious
character is going to
yield so to conclude these models for
status and conf in ning and London
modest yielding and respectful
assertiveness lead to different
strategies in the short term modest
yielding involves for fitting one's
short-term interest while respectful
assertiveness involves defending it in
the long term however both our
strategies to create and uphold
hierarchies okay I'll finish I'll end
here and I look forward to uh our
discussion